% SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2025 James R. Barlow
% SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

(ocr-service)=

# Online deployments

OCRmyPDF is designed to be used as a command line tool, but it can be
used in a web service. This document describes some considerations for
doing so.

A basic web service implementation is provided in the source code
repository, as `misc/webservice.py`. It is only demonstration quality
and is not intended for production use.

OCRmyPDF is not designed for use as a public web service where a
malicious user could upload a chosen PDF. In particular, it is not
necessarily secure against PDF malware or PDFs that cause denial of
service. For further discussino of security, see
[security](security).

OCRmyPDF relies on Ghostscript, and therefore, if deployed online one
should be prepared to comply with Ghostscript\'s Affero GPL license, and
any other licenses.

Setting aside these concerns, a side effect of OCRmyPDF is that it may
incidentally sanitize PDFs containing certain types of malware. It
repairs the PDF with pikepdf/libqpdf, which could correct malformed PDF
structures that are part of an attack. When PDF/A output is selected
(the default), the input PDF is partially reconstructed by Ghostscript.
When `--force-ocr` is used, all pages are rasterized and reconverted to
PDF, which could remove malware in embedded images.

## Limiting CPU usage

OCRmyPDF will attempt to use all available CPUs and storage, so
executing `nice ocrmypdf` or limiting the number of jobs with the
`--jobs` argument may ensure the server remains responsive. Another
option would be to run OCRmyPDF jobs inside a Docker container, a
virtual machine, or a cloud instance, which can impose its own limits on
CPU usage and be terminated \"from orbit\" if it fails to complete.

## Temporary storage requirements

OCRmyPDF will use a large amount of temporary storage for its work,
proportional to the total number of pixels needed to rasterize the PDF.
The raster image of a 8.5Ã—11\" color page at 300 DPI takes 25 MB
uncompressed; OCRmyPDF saves its intermediates as PNG, but that still
means it requires about 9 MB per intermediate based on average
compression ratios. Multiple intermediates per page are also required,
depending on the command line given. A rule of thumb would be to allow
100 MB of temporary storage per page in a file -- meaning that a small
cloud servers or small VM partitions should be provisioned with plenty
of extra space, if say, a 500 page file might be sent.

To change the temporary directory, see [tmpdir](#tmpdir).

On Amazon Web Services or other cloud vendors, consider setting your
temporary directory to [empheral
storage](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/InstanceStorage.html).

## Timeouts

To prevent excessively long OCR jobs consider setting
`--tesseract-timeout` and/or `--skip-big` arguments. `--skip-big` is
particularly helpful if your PDFs include documents such as reports on
standard page sizes with large images attached - often large images are
not worth OCR\'ing anyway.

## Document management systems

If you are looking for a full document management system, consider
[paperless-ngx](https://github.com/paperless-ngx/paperless-ngx), which
is a web application that uses OCRmyPDF to automatically OCR and archive
documents.

## Commercial OCR alternatives

The author also provides professional services that include OCR and
building databases around PDFs, and is happy to provide consultation.

Abbyy Cloud OCR is viable commercial alternative with a web services
API. Amazon Textract, Google Cloud Vision, and Microsoft Azure Computer
Vision provide advanced OCR but have less PDF rendering capability.
